i am delighted and honored
and excited to um introduce ruja
benjamin
she's an associate professor of african
american studies at princeton university
she's founder of the just data lab and
author of
race after technology abolitionist tools
for the new gym code
and editor of captivating technology
reimagining race car spiral techno
science and liberatory imagination in
everyday life
among many other publications ruja's
work investigates the social dimensions
of science medicine and technology with
a focus on the relationship between
innovation and inequity
health and justice knowledge and power
she's a recipient of numerous awards and
fellowships including
from the american council of learned
societies
national science foundation institute
for advanced study and
in 2017 she received the president's
award for distinguished teaching at
princeton
um and so uh everyone please
enjoy and be inspired by this talk from
ru how do you know thank you so much to
the conference organizers for inviting
me to be in conversation
all of you today really my honor
as we begin i'd like to acknowledge that
the land on which
i'm calling in from is the traditional
unseated territory
of the lenape people let's also
acknowledge the intertwined legacies
that is the devastation of transatlantic
slavery and settler colonialism
which contribute to the creation and
continued wealth
of this nation we acknowledge the
reparations owed to black and indigenous
communities and nations
and the impossibilities of return
for generations past we're alive today
in an era of necessary resistance and
awakening to preserve this planet
and all the beautiful creation that is
no doubt
worthy of the struggle ashay
with that let's begin a conversation
about
racing to the future i'd like to
um suggest that one way of looking at
our current moment
is that the lights have been turned all
the way on
and while some of us have had to develop
night vision in order to navigate a
world that was designed hostilely
um to get us many people
are for the first time beginning to
witness
the the violent patterns and processes
that plague everyday life and so one of
the things
in terms of collective action in to
confront this reality is that we
we have to have some shared vision of
what it is we're up against
what exactly are the contours of
division
and vision that shape our reality i
think too often
we rely only on anic data
that is our personal experiences and
lenses to make sense of this reality
when we have to really begin to hone um
some shared conceptual lenses in order
to then build collective action
and so what i want to suggest is that
racism is one of many axes one of many
lenses that
distort our collective vision it
distorts
not only how we see but how we're seen
it distorts not only how we know one
another but also how we come to know
ourselves
and so while the kinds of distortions
that is deadly distortions
um that tend to make the news are around
a ra racist police violence
and profiling as shown here where miami
pd
used these faces as target practice
thereby priming themselves to look for
threat
and danger in the faces of black men
the the distortions happen much more
broadly and deeply
in this particular case when this news
circulated
clergy mostly white clergy at the time
responded using the hashtag
use me instead and put their own faces
as a one way to call out the perversity
of you know those who are sworn to
protect and serve
associating danger with blackness this
kind of everyday anti-blackness that
again i want to remind us is not
relegated to simply one domain like
policing but pervades every institution
in this case i have colleagues at the
yale school of education who
published findings from a study in which
they put
eye tracking technology on preschool
teachers and then had them look at
little children playing together
and told them prime them said look for
challenging behavior and the teacher's
attention continuously went to the
little black boys in the play group even
though they were behaving the same way
as all the other children
and so this on the other end of the
spectrum from police profiling to
educational disciplinary profiling
is the kind of spectrum that we have to
zoom the lens out and be able to see the
patterns the everyday anti-blackness
that infects
all of our institutions that we didn't
wake up
just seeing and being this way but
rather
this form of racial architecture
racial vision has been um shaped
over time one figure who was prominent
in that
that creation is george cuvier french
naturalist who
pitted whiteness against blackness in
this way the white race
with oval face straight hair and nose to
which the civilized people of europe
belong
and which appear to us the most
beautiful of all is also superior to
others by its genius
courage and activity which of course is
juxtaposed to blackness the negro race
is marked by black complexion crisp of
wooly hair
compressed cranium and a flat nose the
projection of the lower parts of the
face
and the monkey tribe which it consists
have always
remained in the most complete state of
barbarism
so a lot going on here with cuvier's
description
one is which one in which blackness is
always the polarity of whiteness
is part of the architecture of race and
that's why despite the wide variety of
humankind and many
other racial ethnic groups it's vital to
understand
this polarity because it's the one upon
which
our racial architecture has been built
the other is to note how phenotype that
is bodies are the
are the map on which these other
characteristics
um are placed characteristics of
behavior
and culture and beauty and intelligence
and the reason is is because
in order to naturalize racial difference
scientists and their pro their you know
other
uh sort of ambassadors of this racial
vision
needed to make it seem as if these
differences
were immutable god given
that it was not just simply them
fabricating it in order to justify a
political structure
but rather that this is something that
we're born with
these differences this hierarchy and so
part of the work that is upon us
is to denaturalize this racial vision
and division that continues to distort
how we see one another and how we're
seen it continues to infect our visual
culture today and this is one example of
many many that i could choose from in
which
we see this vogue cover with lebron and
gisele
mirroring this world war one propaganda
propaganda poster in which the germans
are brutish in that case but how
the both the positioning of lebron his
hand put
posture his his shoe the shoe sneaker
choice uh always in comparison to
the frailty the beauty of whiteness so
to understand this binary
and understand this brutishness that
recalls cuvier's description
that is something that still haunts our
visual culture and our
our sense of who we each are
which brings us to technology where if
you type
for example a simple exercise in your
google images
unprofessional hairstyles or
professional hairstyles
you'll see a pattern emerge in which
unprofessional will
will bring up mostly black women wearing
their hair naturally
and professional will bring up mostly
white women
with their hair in you know very
traditional styles stereotypically
um you know posh styles except some
exceptions we have the hunger games lady
over there on your left and you have
beyonce on your right but
exception's not withstanding there's a
general pattern that we observe
that again recalls cuvier's description
of
uncivilized associated with negroes and
so
unprofessional continues to be coded
with blackness or associated with
blackness and discrimination just with
respect to hair is so pervasive that
some us states have actually had to pass
laws in california it's called the crown
act
that prohibits discrimination against
black women's
various hairstyles and so this is just
one
sort of simple exercise that gets us to
confront
how we continue to make these judgments
that are you
that use the body as a proxy for deeper
qualities
and capacities and so while this may
seem
like a simple sort of aesthetic exercise
the the stakes are raised when we get to
other arenas like health care and
policing
to to before we jump into that though i
want to suggest that
uh you know part of our uh shared vision
has to move beyond the
techno-deterministic
rendering of social reality where
technology is
painted as either totally bad or good
on your left is the techno-dystopian
variety in which the robots are going to
get us
they're going to slay us they're going
to take all the jobs they're going to
remove human agency
and that's the the story that hollywood
likes to sell us
on your right is the techno-utopian
story that the robots are going to save
us they're going to heal us they're more
efficient they're more equitable
and of course this is the kool-aid that
silicon valley likes to sell us
and although on the surface these seem
like opposing stories they
they share an underlying logic that is
technology is in the driver's
seat and it removes the human agents
behind the screen who are producing
this reality this digital reality
and as it stands it's a very narrow
slice of humanity whose world views
whose imagination
desires um biases and assumptions are
being encoded
into our digital infrastructures and so
part of
reclaiming and regaining power is to
refute
both ends of that story the deck techno
dystopian or utopian
and really point to the human agency
that's shaping this
and in order to broaden participation
and democratize this process
so to that end i want to offer three
main takeaways
that um kind of are the strands that
will shape the rest of my comments and
we can use any of these as a jumping off
point for discussion
the first takeaway is that i want us to
understand
racism as productive not in the sense of
being good
but in the literal capacity of racism to
produce
things of value to some even as
it wreaks havoc on others because many
of us are still
thought taught to think and talk about
racism as if
it were an aberration a glitch
an accident an isolated incident
a bad apple in the back woods and
outdated
rather than as innovative systemic
diffuse and attached incident
the entire orchard in the ivory tower in
the tech industry
forward-looking productive in my field
of sociology
we often say race is socially
constructed but we often fail to state
the corollary
that racism constructs secondly i'd like
us to think about the way that race and
technology
shape one another because more and more
people are accustomed to thinking about
the ethical
and social impacts of technology which
is important
but that's only half of the story
because social norms
values structures all exist prior to any
given tech development
so it's not simply about the impacts but
also the social inputs
that make some inventions appear
inevitable and desirable
which leads to a third provocation that
is imagination
is a contested field of action not an
ephemeral
afterthought that we have the luxury to
dismiss or
romanticize but a battleground a
resource an
input and output of technology and
social order
in fact we should acknowledge that most
people are forced to live inside someone
else's imagination
and one of the things we have to come to
grips with is how the nightmares that
many people are forced to endure
are the underside of elite fantasies
about efficiency
profit and social control so racism
among other axes of domination helps to
produce this fragmented imagination
where
you have misery for some monopoly for
others
that means for those of us who want to
construct a different
social reality one that's grounded in
justice and joy
we can't only critique the underside but
we also have to wrestle with the deep
investments
the desire even that many people have
for social domination
so that's the sort of trailer the main
takeaways now let's turn to some more
specifics
beginning with a relatively new app
called citizen
which will send you real-time crime
alerts based on a curated selection of
9-1-1
calls it also offers a way for users to
report
live stream and comment on purported
crimes via the app
and it'll show you incidents as red dots
on a map
so you can avoid particular areas which
is just a slightly less racialized
version of other apps called
ghetto tracker and sketch factor which
use public data to help people avoid
supposedly dangerous areas
now some of you are probably thinking
what could possibly go wrong in the age
of barbecue becky's
calling the police on black people
cooking
walking breathing bird watching
out of place it turns out that even a
stanford educated environmental
scientist living in the bay area
pictured here
is an ambassador of the carceral state
calling the police
on a cookout at lake merritt it's worth
noting too that this app
citizen was originally called the less
chill name
vigilante and in its rebranding it also
moved away from encouraging people to
stop crime but rather now
simply to avoid it as one member of the
new york city council put it
crime is now at historic lows in the
city but because
residents are constantly being bombarded
with push notifications of crime
they believe the city is going to hell
in a hand basket
not only is this categorically false
it's distracting people from very real
public safety issues like reckless
driving or rising opioid use that don't
show up on the app
what's most important to our discussion
i think is that citizen and other tech
fixes for social problems aren't simply
about technology's impact
but they're also about how social norms
and values racial norms and values
shape what tools are imagined necessary
in the first place so this dynamic is
what i take up
in two new books the first examining the
interplay
between race automation and machine bias
more broadly as an extension
of older forms of racial domination the
second is an edited volume
on the carceral dimensions of technology
across a wide range of social arenas
from more traditional sites like
policing and prisons
to less obvious contexts like the retail
industry
financial technologies and the digital
service economy
both books are wrestling in different
ways with the way that technology
captivates
in the sense of fascinating charming and
bewitching
while also potentially subduing and
subjugating people
to wrestle with this duplicity for first
we have to pierce
through the fancy rhetoric and buzzwords
of tech utopianism
to that end i'd like to pause for just a
moment for a brief
speculative inter interlude a clip from
a film by one of my favorite filmmakers
alex rivera from sleep dealers
so here's a clip it's about three
minutes long in this scene you'll see
the
the character as he crosses the border
for the first time so you see he's in
mexico
but he comes to america in a new way
sleep dealers
[Music]
is
san diego
me
so
[Music]
oh
um
espanol
all right so you know there's again so
much going on
uh just even that clip much less the
longer film but there's just two things
that i just want to point out for our
purposes today
the first is that the clip reminds us
that automation does not get rid of
embodiment
that in fact for some it often means the
intensification
and violent sort of intrusion of
certain kinds of embodiment and
surveillance the other
is that the film illustrates how the
fantasy of some
is the nightmare of others for those on
the other side of these sleep dealing
warehouses who are experiencing the
conveniences
of this automation that is a fantasy
that relies on the nightmare that's
being lived
in in this particular world in this clip
so how should we understand this
duplicity of tech fixes
reported solutions that nevertheless
reinforce and even deepen
existing hierarchies in terms of popular
discourse what got me
interested in that question was the
proliferation
of headlines and hot takes about
so-called
racist and sexist robots there was a
first wave of stories
a few years ago that seemed to be
shocked at the prospect that
in langdon winners terms artifacts have
politics
a second wave seemed less surprised well
of course
technology inherits its creators biases
and now i think we've entered
a phase of attempts to override and
address the default
settings of racist and sexist robots for
better or worse
and one of the challenges we face is how
to meaningfully differentiate
technologies
that are used to differentiate us take
for example
a recent study racial bias in a medical
algorithm
favors white patients over sick or black
patients reports
obermeyer and colleagues in which the
researchers were actually able to look
inside the black box of algorithm design
which is typically not possible with
proprietary systems
what's especially important to note here
is that the algorithm does not
explicitly take note of race
that is to say it's race neutral
by using costs to predict health care
needs
this digital triaging system unwittingly
reproduces racial disparities in health
care because on average
black people incur fewer costs for a
variety of reasons
including systemic racism and in my
review of the study by obermeyer and
colleagues i
argue that indifference to social
reality on the part of tech designers
and adopters
can be even more harmful than malicious
intent
in the case of this widely used
healthcare algorithm affecting millions
of
people more than double the number of
black patients
would have been enrolled in programs
designed to help them stay out of the
hospital
if the predictions were actually based
on need rather than cost
so race neutrality it turns out can be a
deadly force
this combination of coded bias and
imagined objectivity
is what i've termed the new gym code
innovation that enables
social containment while appearing
fairer than discriminatory practices of
a previous era
which of course in the united states is
called jim crow what i'm drawing
attention to with this concept
is that technology can hide the ongoing
nature of social domination and allow it
to penetrate
every facet of our lives under the guise
of progress
in my work i encourage us to think about
how anti-blackness gets encoded in and
exercised through automated systems
by offering four conceptual offspring to
the new gym code
that follow along a kind of spectrum
from the most obvious
engineered inequity to the most
insidious
techno benevolence for the sake of time
i'm just going to sketch out the last
two
and encourage you to engage with race
after technology because these are the
structuring concepts for the different
chapters
so they go into much more depth so
coded exposure names the tension between
ongoing surveillance of racialized
populations
and calls for digital recognition and
inclusion
the desire to literally be seen by
technologies
what i'd like to underscore though is
that it's not only in the process of
being out of sight
but also in the danger of being too
centered
that racialized groups are made
vulnerable so that being included is not
simply positive recognition
but can be a form of unwanted exposure
and attention
but not without creative resistance as
i'll come back to in just a moment
but first one more short clip that
illustrates one side of this dialectic
[Music]
hello motion sensors
emotioning
the motioning please sense me
oh uh one other thing lem mentioned that
there's uh something weird going on with
the motion sensors in the lab
oh yeah we replaced all the sensors in
the building with a new state-of-the-art
system that's gonna save money
it works by detecting light reflected
off the skin well lem says it doesn't
work at all
lem's wrong it does work although there
is a problem
it doesn't seem to see black people
the system doesn't see black people i
know weird huh
that's more than weird veronica that's
basically well
racist the company's position is that
it's actually the opposite of racist
because it's not
targeting black people it's just
ignoring them they insist the worst
people can call it
is indifferent
nothing we never should have let that
white guy off
work blackman in an elevator of course
the white guy's gonna get off
veronica oh god this looks way too
aggressive
no it's okay i think i know why you're
all here
well most of you
um i have something prepared um
veronica you are a terrific boss thank
you lam i'll take it from here
let me start by apologizing on behalf of
verdian for this inexcusable situation
i laid in a veronica pretty good i
figured it was my only shot so
i took the gloves off wow that sounds
great lamb sounds like you gave the
company a really strong message oh yeah
she said they're working 24 7 to make
things right
[Music]
can you believe this i know isn't it
great
we all get to home free white guys you
like it
yeah hey ty's the best he anticipates
everything i need
plus he picked up my dry cleaning oh
andy got this kink out of my neck
really mm-hmm oh my god sucks
well maybe you're just not using yours
right yeah maybe it's on you dude
shut up stew
i got the worst black guy
it turned out lem had also been thinking
about the money issue
and he put together some interesting
numbers to show us
[Music]
and then we all went to speak to
management in a language they could
understand within a margin of error of
plus or minus one percent
and so if the company keeps hiring white
people to follow black people to follow
white people to follow black people
by thursday june 27 2013.
every person on earth will be working
for us
and we don't have the parking for that
no way all right sometimes you have to
laugh to keep from crying um
and so the show for me brilliantly
depicts
how a superficial corporate diversity
ethos
the prioritization of efficiency
over equity and the default whiteness of
tech development work together to ensure
that
innovation literally produces
containment in this case
so the fact that darker skin employees
are unable to use the elevators doors
water fountains or turn the lights on
is treated as a minor inconvenience in
service to
a greater good but good for whom is what
we have to continuously ask
finally some of the most interesting
developments i think are those we can
think of
as techno benevolence that aims to
address bias in various ways
take for example how ai knew to ai
techniques to vet
job applicants a company called higher
view
aims to quote reduce unconscious bias
and promote diversity
in the workplace by using an ai-powered
program that analyzes recorded
interviews of prospective employees
so it uses thousands of data points
including verbal and non-verbal cues
like facial expression
posture vocal tone and then compares job
seekers scores with those of existing
top performing employees
to decide who to flag as a desirable
hire and who to reject
so the sheer size of many applicant
pools and the amount of time and money
that companies pour into recruitment
is astronomical so companies like higher
view can narrow the eligible pool
at a fraction of the time and cost and
so hundreds of companies worldwide have
signed on
everyone from goldman sachs hilton
unilever red sox
the atlantic public schools vodafone and
the list goes on
another value added according to higher
views that there's a lot that a human
interviewer misses that ai can keep
track of
to make quote data-driven talent
decisions
after all the problem of employment
discrimination is widespread and
well-documented
so the logic goes wouldn't this be even
more reason
to outsource decisions to ai well
consider a study by a princeton team of
computer scientists which examined
whether
a popular algorithm trained on human
writing online
exhibited the same racially biased
tendencies that psychologists have
documented among humans
in particular they found that the
algorithm associated white sounding
names with pleasant words
and black sounding names with unpleasant
ones which actually builds on the
classic audit study from about 2002 or
three
in which two university of chicago
economists sent out thousands of resumes
to employers
in boston and chicago and found the same
pattern of discrimination based on names
alone
when they did this audit so too with
gender-coded words and names as amazon
learned a few years ago when its own
hiring algorithm was found
discriminating
against women nevertheless it should be
clear
why technical fixes that claim to bypass
human biases are so
desirable if only there was a way to
slay centuries of racist and sexist
demons with
a social justice bot beyond desirable
more
like magical magical for employers
perhaps looking to streamline the
grueling work of recruitment
but a curse for many job seekers as this
headline puts it
your next interview could be with a
racist bot
bringing us back to that problem space
we started with
though it's worth noting that jobs some
job seekers are already
developing ways to subvert the system by
trading answers to employers tests
and creating fake applications as
informal audits of their own
in fact one hr employee for a major
company
recommends slipping the words oxford or
cambridge into our cvs with invisible
white text
to pass the automated screening in terms
of a more collective response
a federation of european trade unions
called uni global
has developed a charter of digital
rights for workers touching on automated
and ai based decisions to be included
in bargaining agreements another
development that keeps me somewhat
hopeful is that tech workers themselves
have increasingly
been speaking out against the most
egregious forms of corporate collusion
with state-sanctioned racism for example
thousands of google employees condemned
the company's collaboration
on a pentagon program that uses ai to
make drone strikes more effective
and a growing number of microsoft
employees are opposed to the company's
ice contract
saying that quote as the people who
build the technologies that microsoft
profits from
we refuse to be complicit and as this
article published by science for the
people reminds us
contrary to popular narratives
organizing among technical workers has a
vibrant history
including engineers and technicians in
the 60s and 70s who fought
professionalism
reformism and individualism to
contribute to radical labor organizing
the current tech workers movement which
includes students across our many
institutions
can draw from past organizers strategies
and challenges
in learning to navigate the
contradictions and complexities of
organizing
in tech today in terms of education
which i think of as one of the ground
zeroes for planting
a deeper approach to deep learning as it
were i'll also mention
one concrete resource that you all can
download for free called the advancing
racial literacy in tech handbook which
was developed by some wonderful
colleagues
at the data and society research
institute
the aim of this intervention is
threefold to develop an intellectual
understanding of how
structural racism operates in social
media platforms algorithms and
technologies not yet developed
and emotional intelligence concerning
how to resolve racially stressful
situations within
organizations and a commitment to take
action to reduce
harms to communities of color in that
spirit the best news i can share with
you
is that there are many different tech
justice organizations
that are growing and proliferating all
over the world including data for black
lives and the detroit community tech
project that's mostly based here
in the u.s but also a lot of things
happening in other countries which i'm
happy to share
including colleagues and comrades in
brazil
who've been at the forefront of building
libertarian approaches to tech
that center black communities including
preta lab
led by sylvania bahia which focuses on
black women programmers and activists
parifa code an organization that works
with young people
living in the favelas cabradev which
organizes workshops and a podcast with
the aim of democratizing technology and
centering the experiences
of afro-brazilians and people who live
in favelas
and blogueras negras black women
bloggers which was one of the first hubs
of black digital activism
in brazil and there's so many more
initiatives i could mention
we have to remind ourselves as we build
this momentum and build this movement
this is part of a much
longer data justice struggle that we can
turn to
w e b du bois's work in his data
visualizations
to ida b wells barnett's expert
deployment of statistics in the red
record
this is a tradition that we today are
compelled to carry on to close then
let me end with the the late legal and
critical race scholar derrick a bell
who encouraged a radical assessment of
reality through
creative methods and racial reversals
insisting
that to see things as they really are
you must
imagine them for what they might be
which is why
i'm convinced that the arts and
humanities are vital to
any conversation and any movement
working for data justice
one of my favorite examples of what we
might call a
bellian racial reversal is this parity
project
that begins by subverting the anti-black
logics embedded in new high-tech
approaches
to crime prevention instead of using
predictive policing techniques to
forecast
street crime the white-collar early
warning system flips the script by
creating a heat map
that flags city blocks where financial
crimes are likely to occur
the system not only brings the hidden
but no less deadly crimes of capitalism
interview but
includes an app that alerts users when
they've entered high-risk areas to
encourage citizen policing
and awareness taking it one step further
the development team
is working on a facial recognition
program to flag
individuals who are likely perpetrators
and the training set
used to design the algorithm includes
the profile photos of seven
000 corporate executives downloaded from
linkedin
not surprisingly the average face of a
criminal
is white and male to be sure creative
exercises like this are only comical
when we ignore
that all of its features are drawn
directly from
actually existing proposals and
practices
in the real world including the use of
facial images to predict criminality
by deliberately and inventively
upsetting the status quo in this
manner analysts and artists can better
understand and expose the many
forms of discrimination embedded in and
enabled by technology
so here's my final proposition if
it is the case that inequity and
injustice is woven into the very fabric
of our society from our educational
system to our criminal punishment system
to our computer systems then it means
each twist coil and code is a chance for
us
to weave new patterns practices and
politics
the vastness of the problems that we're
up against will be their undoing
once we accept that we are pattern
makers
so if as i suggested at the start an a
historic and
asocial approach to machine learning and
ai
captures and contains then a
historically and sociologically grounded
approach
opens up possibilities and pathways it
creates new settings
encodes new values and builds on
critical
intellectual traditions that have
continuously
developed insights and strategies
grounded in justice
and my hope is that we will all find
ways to build on this tradition
okay we're back here with ruja thank you
so much for
that my pleasure thank you for listening
thank you for having me yeah it's
wonderful and i think it's
a lot of material that our audience in
particular needs to hear
um one of the things i kind of wanted to
start with because we talk about it a
lot
in terms of what we're trying to do is
just restoring agency
in the midst of all these things that
seem like they could be
um insurmountable
in certain you know because they're just
such deeply ingrained
uh inequities in our society
and so there were a couple of things you
said you know one um
in terms of media arts which is what
kind of the space that we're in
um the space between
how race and technology are co-produced
and how imagine imagination is a
contested field of act
action is directly kind of the
intersection that we're talking about
um and so at the end of uh
race after technology you talked a
little bit about white-collar crime
risk zones and also bail block i believe
which we showed here in 2018 and so i
was just wondering if you had
those in any more um
[Music]
uh as artists i think it's really easy
to feel
like in the midst of all this that sort
of work is a luxury or not important
thoughts on like why it has
particular use and agency in this time
to you know
yeah move the needle on this stuff i'd
be appreciative
yeah absolutely it really circles back
to the first part of your reflection
which is anything that we can do to
call into question the inevitability
of the particular technologies that we
happen to have now
and so and that's where imagination
comes in is to show
that what we have now wasn't inevitable
it was created through
choices that people organizations
companies have made
and so a particular experience that i
had recently that hit
that home for me was a student run
conference here at princeton that was
all about innovation
and um one of the other uh speakers
was one of the main personalities behind
the singularity
university in that whole phenomenon and
he was speaking right before me through
a kind of you know zoom virtual thing
like what i'm doing now
and the last thing he kind of said to
the students this
hall packed with students was basically
this is what's happening x y and z what
i've laid out for you this is what's
coming
you either get on board or you get out
of the way
and so it was a very deterministic very
like there was
there was no agency it was but the
but what was considered what's couched
as agency there is your
your ability to choose to be part of
this thing that we have created
or not but there's no third way to say
no we don't want this but we want to
channel our agency in another direction
and so the first thing i did as soon as
i got up there was like
he's wrong you do you do have a choice
you don't have to
either get out of the way or get on the
train that they've set for us
and so really thinking about art
as a vehicle to to concretize
to imagine that third fourth fifth
option
rather than just having these these
choices that are set for us
and so in addition to the white collar
early warning system
there are all also so many other actual
initiatives that are doing that are
reframing
the problem in the way that white collar
is for example
based in the bay area the anti-eviction
mapping project
which you know is taking the lens and
rather than
pathologizing people who are trying to
struggle to make
rent and like stay in their homes it's
turning
the data and the digital sort of lens
back on those
who are producing risk in terms of the
housing market the realtors the
landlords
collecting data visualizing data and
equipping housing justice advocates with
that
that information in some ways it's a
actual you know um tool whereas the
white collar
early warning system is still in the
speculative phase i do know of a project
that was a collaboration between some
people in policy law
sts in which it was in the context of
the criminal
legal system and they they also added a
speculative component to their work
where rather than
calculating the riskiness of defendants
on trial or people up for parole
they turned the lens back onto judges
and calculated how
likely judges would be to you know go
against the constitution and make
judgments that were you know
harmful in a whole variety of cases and
so for those interested
in that last example you can look up a
quick
write-up about that work under the title
studying up on medium um
by a group of um colleagues who put that
together and so there's a number of ways
that
and so part of the thing i just want to
impress upon us is that
um the media arts is not only about like
the literal kind of way in which we
think about imagination
in terms of vr or literal storytelling
it's about
all of the ways that we tell stories
through data like a bland
statistics like a chart you know
is a kind of storytelling in the in the
way that it tries to remove
the subjectivity and purport neutrality
and so in some ways we want to
um pull out the narratives that are
embedded in everything
not just in literal storytelling and
think about the
creativity in that way that more
expansive way as well
yeah great kalani do you have any
yeah i'm thinking about the threat in
your talk about the duplicity of tech
solutions
um and also this idea of like the
fantasy of one relying on the nightmare
of another
right um and so i'm someone who works
with artists but also i work in industry
i'm a technologist and i'm working with
startups and i'm
part of that silicon valley ecosystem
and um
you know really glad to have your book
in my hands and you know i
i know that it's been referred to as
sort of a field guide
and so i'm curious if you can talk a
little bit about the ways people in
industry can apply some of these things
yeah thank you for that question and in
fact it's been
i think the most surprising thing about
um the reception to race
after technology is the fact that people
in industry have found it useful because
that was not my intended audience so
whereas
there are many great books that i could
recommend that are directed much more
towards practitioners and people
in the tech industry i wanted this to be
a field guide
for people in community organizations
students thinking about which direction
they want to take
um the sort of intellectual foundations
to resist
the new gym code more so than
um for those who are in the industry now
but what i said is like
i've been i've been i'm happy to see
the so much receptivity by those who are
working in the context
that i'm critiquing to think anew about
their own responsibility and i tend to
think about
um mobilizing and power in that context
collectively
so as in the talk where i sort of
mention tech won't build it and other
organizing efforts
where tech workers collectively even if
individually you feel like you don't
have much say or power to redirect
you know various contracts or things
that your your employer is doing
collectively there's much more power i
think and so that's where i really
encourage people to think about what
kind of organizing practices whether in
the
uniform of unions or other
collaborations
inside outside collaborations with
community-based organizations there is a
book
um recently that i read that's much more
pointed towards
individual practitioners and what they
can do um
two books actually um design justice by
sasha costanza
three books actually so the second one
is data feminism
by lauren klein and catherine dignazio
data feminism and design justice offer
really really great pragmatic
principled um suggestions advice
manifestos for what people in industry
can do and last but not least
the most irreverent but i think also
useful
book is ruined by design by michael
montoyo and so for those who are kind of
looking like okay
i get the problem what individually can
i do these three
books i think are a great starting place
to put in conversation with my own work
that isn't primarily directed um towards
people in industry
thank you for that i don't know if we
have any
i see tiffany in here if we have any
questions from the uh if you're in the
lounges and have questions please
chat them in um and we'll we'll bring
them up
um i actually see one here from huntress
actually oh great awesome yeah i can go
ahead and uh read that and this was
something that they were chatting about
during the talk also
um so it says ruja how do you think we
can
build better relationships between
medicine and the oppressed
doctors black trans people and women uh
that they are in conflict with
i wish a way to re-educate
and create a discussion not arguments
and dismissal and violence
yes yes to all of that and again there's
some really
great initiatives movement building
happening i would have really encourage
anyone who's interested in that
important question
to check out the health justice commons
which is offers popular education tools
facilitation guides
um it has a it has a medical abuse
hotline
so that when harm is done you have
somewhere to call and report and
gathering data again
on those everyday kinds of medical harms
that cut across
different social groups so check out the
health justice commons it's relatively
new
many of the initial founders are based
in the bay area
um i'm affiliated with it and so check
out all of the great um
resources that they have to to do almost
exactly what you described huntress and
so plugging into their work
um and also like thinking about if
you're not in the bay area
sort of taking those tools and applying
them in other locales is also really
great
another organization for those who are
health practitioners in the same way
that kalani you asked what tech
practitioners can do
people who are working in the healthcare
industry an organization i would really
encourage you to plug into is
white coats for black lives that have
been responsible for organizing a lot of
the
direct action and die-ins and protests
during clovid but also well before covid
i'm following michael brown's murder
and they have chapters all over the
country and for me they offer a
wonderful model of what organ
professional organizing can look like
um and i and i hope that that something
similar is bubbling that might um
unify people working whether it's in
engineering schools or
whether it's working in other kind of
stem fields where you think about even
if you're one of a few people
at your institution or your company or
organization
when you begin to step back and think
but i share these concerns and these
and these issues with like-minded people
across
different places that we can organize
together and have a much greater effect
than if i just think about you know
joining forces with people just in my
own context and so check out white coats
for black lives
and the health justice commons as two
different ways
to get at that question
is there anything else from the
um curious what rooha is working on now
and looking forward to coming
up here yeah that's the good question
it's
like the the the book is still like you
know
still warm but people want to know
what's next
i love it we can't rest
i am working on a book tentatively
titled viral justice that's looking at
this
context of pandemic and policing and
really
thinking about um what we can learn
in terms of everyday forms of um
action that people can do not just
organizing
as the kind of things i just described
but you know really thinking about
individual agency again in this context
so i'm working on a book it's part
memoir part manifesto called viral
justice i'm working on a children's book
um that's kind of like goldilocks meets
the next door app um with some
surveillance
and some um some
fake news in the mix and so if there's
any illustrators out there
i'm working on that children's book so
ping me
and so those are the two main things i'm
doing right now
have you ever um worked with in or in
collaboration
in any so you know this is uh this
festival has had a lot of artists
working within sort of
vr simulations and narratives and things
like that and clearly with the
movie clip you you uh
are into movie-based story narrative
have you ever worked in any of those
sorts of forms or are you interested in
it or this
i haven't directly but two really close
colleagues have brought me into the
process that they've been working on
kamal sinclair who was at sundance
making a new reality
um and the the guild of future
architects so that is one way that i'm
plugged in and also desmond patton
at columbia university do you hear that
little ring okay i think that might be
kalani
yeah so to answer your question not
directly but through desmond
professor desmond patton's work at
columbia and kamal sinclair's work
um i've been sort of um engaging it from
afar
i haven't done anything directly in that
space here
well if you're interested i'm sure there
are a bunch of people listening that
would love to
collaborate here's just a couple more
questions here tiffany says how many of
these
issues are unique to tech versus just
the latest tendrils of capitalism
enabled or scaled by tech
can we make meaningful change while
working within neoliberal capitalist
frameworks
um the short answer to the second
question is no
we can't we have to think about the
entire ecosystem i'm
and that eco a huge part of the
ecosystem has to do with the political
economy just
um like yesterday i believe um there was
announce to the
the real facebook oversight committee
for those who are interested i'll tweet
it out um
after we get off but again thinking
about how
in response to so much of the research
and public criticism
around these issues one of the responses
has been to what i think of as
domesticate the critique by creating
in-house ethics boards in-house
regulatory frameworks when what we
really need
is to think about you know much more
independent
forms of and it's regulation is the
wrong word protections
is the right word um and part of that
has to think about
we have to think about how the economic
incentives to continue to create
one or the other tech mediated form of
discrimination are just so overpowering
that all of these little attempts to
tweak the edges by making things
fair or more representative um are
really
are really gonna um not gonna take us
very far
and so i i think or
you know experiments like platform
cooperativism which if you haven't
taken taken a look at platformcoop.com i
think it is or org
um that and other kind of um explicit
attempts to think about the economic
model in conjunction with these issues
of democracy and discrimination and so
on are really really key
all right and maybe one more here which
is um
feeds directly into sort of the content
that we saw earlier this week which is
um
interested in the points about
post-humanism digital identities in race
after technology especially in light of
the turbo avedon's talk yesterday uh
what do we make of the ability to adopt
an entirely different physical identity
that does not necessarily map onto our
own
physical identity a different physical
but still carries the social codes of
the real world
yeah that's interesting you know my my
thoughts
around that question and around the
larger conversation around
um you know post-humanism is really
for us to think about what elements
of our everyday kind of mundane social
reality
um continue to create parallel universes
where we can't even be
our full selves in the physical world
and where our flesh and blood is
distorted through
racist lenses and sexist lenses so in
some ways
my own concerns um
have less to do with parsing the
politics and ethics of how this takes
shape in vr or in the digital sphere but
to have us really examine how
um our everyday social interactions
are are really um again
distorted is the best word that i can
find or
filtered or um augmented
by social social technologies like
racism or sexism or classism where
you know walking down the street i can
look
like a scary mean whatever so you know
like if you look at the language used to
justify police killings
you know it's a it's a human being there
but because of these
the the augmentations and distortions of
racism
and sexism and so on people are not
seeing their fellow human beings
in in in the light of day and so i would
just redirect our
conversation and questions to thinking
on the ground about how we can
transform that reality so that
we truly see one another rather than
wrestle with the ethics and politics and
i won't say rather there are people who
are doing that and that work is really
valuable but that's just not my
concern main concern
well thank you so much we really
appreciate you being here and i could
not think of a better talk
to sort of wrap up the uh things that
we've been thinking about
all throughout this festival thank you
so much for having me thank you for
inviting me into this wonderful
conversation and community and i hope to
join you in person
one day soon take care anytime you want
you're invited